# **Do I Need a Chatbot Powered by Generative AI**

With generative AI becoming a hot topic (again), CXOs started adding AI projects, especially implementing an AI chatbot like ChatGPT for business, on their to-do list. While a chatbot powered by generative AI may be a game-changer for business, investing in a chatbot is not cheap nor trivial. So it is worth asking first: does your business really need an AI chatbot? We suggest that business leaders answer the 3 questions below to quickly determine whether it is worth investing in a chatbot for a line of business.


## **Q﻿1: Do you want to improve profit margins of services that involve labor-intensive, time-consuming human interactions?**

 - If your answer is no, you don't need a chatbot.
 - If your answer is yes, it's worth considering.

Chatbots are meant to automate human interactions, especially those
that are labor intensive and time consuming. Using the enrollment
counseling service as an example, an enrollment ounselor must handle
complex, personal interactions, such as guiding prospective students
to explore suitable program options, addressing their concerns, and
eventually helping them make an enrollment decision. If your service
is like counseling and tutoring services that require much human time
and effort, investing in a chatbot might be worthwhile: adopt a
chatbot to automate human interactions and reduce human workload.


## **Q﻿2: Do you want to scale out services that require extensive human effort and time?**

   - If your answer is no, you don't need a chatbot.
   - If your answer is yes, it's worth considering.

High-touch servies, such as tutoring, advising and counseling, are
hard to scale due to the human and time effort required. Hiring more
staff may not even be a solution. For example, prospective students of
online programs who have full-time jobs or are located across the
globe, need assistance beyond regular headquarters' business
hours. Hiring human staff to cover off-hour time frames can be
extremely costly and impractical. On the other hand, an AI chatbot can
operate 24/7 and interact with hundreds of thousands of users at the
same time.

## **Q﻿3: Do you want to have a happy and healthy workforce?**

   - If your answer is no, you don't need a chatbot.
   - If your answer is yes, it's worth considering.


Humans dislike repetitive tasks. For example, a human tutor is not thrilled to answer the same question or deliver the same tutorial for hundreds of students over and over again. Emotionally taxing tasks can also lead to burnout, as seen with grievance counselors. In contrast, an AI chatbot can take on the repetitive work without a complaint or emotionally demanding tasks without being burnt out. Humans can then focus on more meaningful or pleasant tasks, thereby enhancing job satisfaction.

In summary, if your answers are **"yes"** to all above 3 questions, it
is worth considering the adoption of an AI chatbot. If you want your
chatbot to get its job done, you want a chatbot powered by generative
AI as a minimal requirement.

## **What's Next**

If you believe you need an AI chatbot, the next step is to select a
proper AI chatbot platform that will enable you to power a useful and
usable AI chatbot. Use the criteria mentioned in [which AI chatbot
platform to use](../how-to-select-ai-chatbot-platform) to evaluate
and select the right platform.
